---
title: Drop the Struggle
date: 2018-06-10T12:56:44+00:00
---
A few years ago, I found myself at a crossroads. I was recovering from a years–long depression, and was overwhelmed with anxiety as I tried to put my life back together. I was afraid I would lose my job—or at least I should&#8217;ve been—because I wasn&#8217;t able to focus on anything except the existential terror I felt.

One day I was feeling particularly distressed, so I left my cubicle on the sixth floor and went down to the main entrance of my office building, near the welcome desk. I went through two sets of doors, felt the warm outdoor air hit my body, took a few steps, and nearly collapsed. I felt weak and unsteady, as if my knees would buckle at any moment. I had no idea what was wrong with me. I had never felt anything like this before. I steadied myself against the archway supports that ran between our two buildings, and slowly recovered my senses and motor control. After a few minutes, I was all right and able to return to my normal level of freak–out again.

I can&#8217;t say if I had a mini panic attack, or if I just came within a hair&#8217;s breadth of fainting, but either way, it scared me. And this was just the most acute of a cacophany of inner alarm bells signaling that I needed something to change. I desperately wanted to quit my job. I dreamed of drafting my resignation letter. Not necessarily because I hated my job, but to get away from the awful gnawing I felt. I would do almost anything to make the incessant, nauseating fear go away.

Over time, and with therapy, I worked through my issues. Things got better. I could go to work without wanting to run away. I could write software again. I started making progress toward a life that felt worth living. Part of making that progress, though, was realizing—again and again—that my job wasn&#8217;t something I was passionate about any longer. I had loved writing software and exploring technology in high school and most of college, but I lost interest over time as I discovered new pursuits that aligned better with my deepest values.

I pursued career counseling, and later, therapy that was explicitly focused on making a career change. Although I was no longer a constant ball of anxiety, I still wrung my hands a lot over what to do with my life. I was concerned about going nowhere fast, and worried that I would stay stuck forever, in a career I no longer found fulfilling.

During my year of career–focused therapy, Dr. K and I dealt with my anxiety around the decision of what path to take. She encouraged me to stop thinking about the decision, and take action instead. I had homework assignments: research three graduate school programs and report back on admission requirements, the reputation of each school, what I liked about the coursework, etc. Funnily enough, it helped. I could no longer just sit and stew in my anxiety about what to do. I had to go out and get more information. I had to research until the doubt started to dissipate.

Eventually I realized graduate school wasn&#8217;t where I wanted to be, and in fact, my software development gig had its upsides. I made great money and could afford an apartment downtown, worked with awesome people, and had plenty of time to puruse my interests and socialize. Date, even. The less I struggled with the _What am I passionate about? What do I want to do?_ questions, the happier and more content I felt. Over time, I realized that yes, I still wanted to change my career, but that my task was to explore alternatives and let things unfold naturally.

One day I woke up and realized I had dropped the struggle. The inner war I had been waging with myself about what to do next was clearly pointless. I had been driving myself crazy for no reason. It wasn&#8217;t that I needed my circumstances to change to be happy; I only needed to accept that life is full of uncertainty, and _yes, I have no idea what to do_. Now be free and enjoy life. Enjoy these moments that are slipping by right now, and stop struggling so damn much.

I didn&#8217;t stop taking action to achieve my dreams (or hell, figure out what my dreams might be). The words I&#8217;m typing right now _are_ me achieving, or at least working towards, my dreams. But anxiety is no longer in the driver&#8217;s seat. I don&#8217;t go around wailing about the fact that I have no fucking clue what I&#8217;m doing with my life. I just get on with exploring and creating and doing whatever I can find to do, whatever makes sense and feels right, and has a chance of success.

I still have a day job. In fact, it&#8217;s the same one I had through years of depression and anxiety. The surprising part is that I enjoy my job more now, after ending my war with it, than I ever did before. I also appreciate it more. It enables me to do so many great things with my life. But none of that would have been possible without dropping the struggle.

Maybe you&#8217;re marshalling some armies of your own right now, engaging in a battle against yourself, where only you can lose. I invite you to drop the struggle. Make peace in your mind, with yourself. Learn to embrace life&#8217;s uncertainties, and the beauty of what&#8217;s right in front of your nose. You never know what you might discover.